[[PAGE:1]]
          Scientific
         Advertising
                              by
                       Claude C. Hopkins




                The Original Text
                Produced, Proofed, & Distributed
                              by




[[PAGE:2]]
                       Chapter 1
                How Advertising Laws Are
                      Established
   The time has come when advertising has in some
hands reached the status of a science. It is based on
fixed principles and is reasonably exact. The causes
and effects have been analyzed until they are well
understood. The correct methods of procedure have
been proved and established. We know what is most
effective, and we act on basic laws.
   Advertising, once a gamble, has thus become, under
able direction, one of the safest business ventures.
Certainly no other enterprise with comparable
possibilities need involve so little risk.
   Therefore, this book deals, not with theories and
opinions, but with well-proved principles and facts. It
is written as a text book for students and a safe guide
for advertisers. Every statement has been weighed.
The book is confined to established fundamentals. If

[[PAGE:3]]
we enter any realms of uncertainty we shall carefully
denote them.
   The present status of advertising is due to many
reasons. Much national advertising has long been
handled by large organizations known as advertising
agencies. Some of these agencies, in their hundreds of
campaigns, have tested and compared the thousands
of plans and ideas. The results have been watched and
recorded, so no lessons have been lost.
   Such agencies employ a high grade of talent. None
but able and experienced men can meet the
requirements in national advertising. Working in co-
operation, learning from each other and from each
new undertaking, some of these men develop into
masters.
   Individuals may come and go, but they leave their
records and ideas behind them. These become a part
of the organization's equipment, and a guide to all who
follow. Thus, in the course of decades, such agencies
become storehouses of advertising experiences,
proved principles, and methods.
   The larger agencies also come into intimate contact
with experts in every department of business. Their
clients are usually dominating concerns. So they see
the results of countless methods and polices. They
become a clearing house for everything pertaining to
[[PAGE:4]]
merchandising. Nearly every selling question which
arises in business is accurately answered by many
experiences.
   Under these conditions, where they long exist,
advertising and merchandising become exact sciences.
Every course is charted. The compass of accurate
knowledge directs the shortest, safest, cheapest course
to any destination.
   We learn the principles and prove them by repeated
tests. This is done through keyed advertising, by
traced returns, largely by the use of coupons. We
compare one way with many others, backward and
forward, and record the results. When one method
invariably proves best, that method becomes a fixed
principle.
   Mail order advertising is traced down to the fraction
of a penny. The cost per reply and cost per dollar of
sale show up with utter exactness.
   One ad is compared with another, one method with
another. Headlines, settings, sizes, arguments and
pictures are compared. To reduce the cost of results
even one per cent means much in some mail order
advertising. So no guesswork is permitted. One must
know what is best. Thus mail order advertising first
established many of our basic laws.


[[PAGE:5]]
   In lines where direct returns are impossible we
compare one town with another. Scores of methods
may be compared in this way, measured by cost of
sales.
   But the most common way is by use of the coupon.
We offer a sample, a book, a free package, or
something to induce direct replies. Thus we learn the
amount of action which each ad engenders.
   But those figures are not final. One ad may bring too
many worthless replies, another replies that are
valuable. So our final conclusions are always based on
cost per customer or cost per dollar of sale.
   These coupon plans are dealt with further in the
chapter on "Test Campaigns." Here we explain only
how we employ them to discover advertising
principles.
   In a large ad agency coupon returns are watched
and recorded on hundreds of different lines. In a single
line they are sometimes recorded on thousands of
separate ads. Thus we test everything pertaining to
advertising. We answer nearly every possible question
by multitudinous traced returns.
   Some things we learn in this way apply only to
particular lines. But even those supply basic principles
for analogous undertakings.

[[PAGE:6]]
    Others apply to all lines. They become fundamentals
for advertising in general. They are universally
applied. No wise advertiser will ever depart from
those unvarying laws.
    We propose in this book to deal with those
fundamentals, those universal principles. To teach
only established technic. There is that technic in
advertising, as in all art, science and mechanics. And it
is, as in all lines, a basic essential.
    The lack of those fundamentals has been the main
trouble with advertising of the past. Each worker was
a law unto himself. All previous knowledge, all
progress in the line, was a closed book to him. It was
like a man trying to build a modern locomotive
without first ascertaining what others had done. It was
like a Columbus starting out to find an undiscovered
land.
    Men were guided by whims and fancies – vagrant,
changing breezes. They rarely arrived at their port.
When they did – by accident – it was by a long
roundabout course.
    Each early mariner in this sea mapped his own
separate course. There were no charts to guide him.
Not a lighthouse marked a harbor, not a buoy showed
a reef. The wrecks were unrecorded, so countless
ventures came to grief on the same rocks and shoals.
[[PAGE:7]]
   Advertising was then a gamble – a speculation of the
rashest sort. One man's guess on the proper course
was as likely to be as good as another’s. There were no
safe pilots, because few sailed the same course twice.
   That condition has been corrected. Now the only
uncertainties pertain to people and to products, not to
methods. It is hard to measure human idiosyncrasies,
the preferences and prejudices, the likes and dislikes
that exist. We cannot say that an article will be
popular, but we know how to find out very quickly. We
do know how to sell it in the most effective way.
   Ventures may fail, but the failures are not disasters.
Losses, when they occur, are but trifling. And the
causes are factors which have nothing to do with the
advertising.
   Advertising has flourished under these new
conditions. It has multiplied in volume, in prestige and
respect. The perils have been almost eliminated. The
results have increased many fold. Just because the
gamble has become a science, the speculation a very
conservative business.
   These facts should be recognized by all. This is no
proper field for sophistry or theory, or for any other
will-o'-the-wisp. The blind leading the blind is
ridiculous. It is pitiful in a field with such vast
possibilities. Success is a rarity, maximum success an
[[PAGE:8]]
impossibility, unless one is guided by laws as
immutable as the law of gravitation.
    So our main purpose here is to set down those laws,
and to tell you how to prove them for yourself. After
them come a myriad of variations. No two advertising
campaigns are ever conducted on lines that are
identical. Individuality is an essential. Imitation is a
reproach. But those variable things which depend on
ingenuity have no place in a text book on advertising.
This is for groundwork only.
    Our hope is to foster advertising through a better
understanding. To place it on a business basis. To have
it recognized as among the safest, surest ventures
which lead to large returns.
    Thousands of conspicuous successes show its
possibilities. Their variety points out its almost
unlimited scope. Yet thousands who need it – who can
never attain their deserts without it – still look upon
its accomplishments as somewhat accidental.
    That was so, but it is not so now. We hope that this
book will throw some new lights on the subject.




[[PAGE:9]]
                    Chapter 2
                Just Salesmanship
   To properly understand advertising or to learn even
its rudiments one must start with the right conception.
Advertising is salesmanship. Its principles are the
principles of salesmanship. Successes and failures in
both lines are due to like causes. Thus every
advertising question should be answered by the
salesman's standards.
   Let us emphasize that point. The only purpose of
advertising is to make sales. It is profitable or
unprofitable according to its actual sales.
   It is not for general effect. It is not to keep your
name before the people. It is not primarily to aid your
other salesmen.
   Treat it as a salesman. Force it to justify itself.
Compare it with other salesmen. Figure its cost and
result. Accept no excuses which good salesmen do not
make. Then you will not go far wrong.

[[PAGE:10]]
   The difference is only in degree. Advertising is
multiplied salesmanship. It may appeal to thousands
while the salesman talks to one. It involves a
corresponding cost. Some people spend $10 per word
on an average advertisement. Therefore every ad
should be a super-salesman.
   A salesman's mistake may cost little. An advertising
mistake may cost a thousand times as much. Be more
cautious, more exacting, therefore.
   A mediocre salesman may affect a small part of your
trade. Mediocre advertising affects all of your trade.
   Many think of advertising as ad-writing. Literary
qualifications have no more to do with it than oratory
has with salesmanship.
   One must be able to express himself briefly, clearly
and convincingly, just as a salesman must. But fine
writing is a distinct disadvantage. So is unique literary
style. They take attention from the subject. They
reveal the hook. Any studied attempt to sell, if
apparent, creates corresponding resistance.
   That is so in personal salesmanship as in
salesmanship-in-print. Fine talkers are rarely good
salesmen. They inspire buyers with the fear of over-
influence. They create the suspicion that an effort is
made to sell them on other lines than merit.

[[PAGE:11]]
    Successful salesmen are rarely good speech makers.
They have few oratorical graces. They are plain and
sincere men who know their customers and know
their lines. So it is in ad-writing.
    Many of the ablest men in advertising are graduate
salesmen. The best we know have been house-to-
house canvassers. They may know little of grammar,
nothing of rhetoric, but they know how to use words
that convince.
    There is one simple and right way to answer many
advertising questions. Ask yourself,"Would this help a
salesman sell the goods?" "Would it help me sell them
if I met the buyer in person?"
    A fair answer to those questions avoids countless
mistakes. But when one tries to show off, or does
things merely to please himself, he is little likely to
strike a chord which leads people to spend money.
    Some argue for slogans, some like clever conceits.
Would you use them in personal salesmanship? Can
you imagine a customer whom such things would
impress? If not, don't rely on them for selling in print.
    Some say "Be very brief. People will read but little."
Would you say that to a salesman? With a prospect
standing before him, would you confine him to any
certain number of words? That would be an
unthinkable handicap.
[[PAGE:12]]
   So in advertising. The only readers we get are
people whom our subject interests. No one reads ads
for amusement, long or short. Consider them as
prospects standing before you, seeking for
information. Give them enough to get action.
   Some advocate large type and big headlines. Yet
they do not admire salesmen who talk in loud voices.
People read all they care to read in 8-point type. Our
magazines and newspapers are printed in that type.
Folks are accustomed to it. Anything larger is like loud
conversation. It gains no attention worth while. It may
not be offensive, but it is useless and wasteful. It
multiplies the cost of your story. And to many it seems
loud and blatant.
   Others look for something queer and unusual. They
want ads distinctive in style or illustration. Would you
want that in a salesman? Do not men who act and
dress in normal ways make a far better impression?
   Some insist on dressy ads. That is all right to a
certain degree, but is quite unimportant. Some poorly-
dressed ads, like poorly-dressed men, prove to be
excellent salesmen. Over-dress in either is a fault.
   So with countless questions. Measure them by
salesmen's standards, not by amusement standards.
Ads are not written to entertain. When they do, those


[[PAGE:13]]
entertainment seekers are little likely to be the people
whom you want.
   That is one of the greatest advertising faults. Ad-
writers abandon their parts. They forget they are
salesmen and try to be performers. Instead of sales,
they seek applause.
   When you plan and prepare an advertisement, keep
before you a typical buyer. Your subject, your headline
has gained his or her attention. Then in everything be
guided by what you would do if you met the buyer
face-to-face. If you are a normal man and a good
salesman you will then do your level best.
   Don't think of people in the mass. That gives you a
blurred view. Think of a typical individual, man or
woman, who is likely to want what you sell. Don't try
to be amusing. Money spending is a serious matter.
Don't boast, for all people resent it. Don't try to show
off. Do just what you think a good salesman should do
with a half-sold person before him.
   Some advertising men go out in person and sell to
people before they plan or write an ad. One of the
ablest of them has spent weeks on one article, selling
from house to house. In this way they learn the
reactions from different forms of argument and
approach. They learn what possible buyers want and


[[PAGE:14]]
the factors which don't appeal. It is quite customary to
interview hundreds of possible customers.
   Others send out questionnaires to learn the attitude
of the buyers. In some way all must learn how to strike
responsive chords. Guesswork is very expensive.
   The maker of an advertised article knows the
manufacturing side and probably the dealer’s side. But
this very knowledge often leads him astray in respect
to customers. His interests are not their interests.
   The advertising man studies the consumer. He tries
to place himself in the position of the buyer. His
success largely depends on doing that to the exclusion
of everything else.
   This book will contain no more important chapter
than this one on salesmanship. The reason for most of
the non-successes in advertising is trying to sell
people what they do not want. But next to that comes
lack of true salesmanship.
   Ads are planned and written with some utterly
wrong conception. They are written to please the
seller. The interests of the buyer are forgotten. One
can never sell goods profitably, in person or in print,
when that attitude exists.




[[PAGE:15]]
                    Chapter 3
                 Offer Service
   Remember the people you address are selfish, as we
all are. They care nothing about your interest or your
profit. They seek service for themselves. Ignoring this
fact is a common mistake and a costly mistake in
advertising. Ads say in effect, "Buy my brand. Give me
the trade you give to others. Let me have the money."
That is not a popular appeal.
   The best ads ask no one to buy. That is useless.
Often they do not quote a price. They do not say that
dealers handle the product.
   The ads are based entirely on service. They offer
wanted information. They site advantages to users.
Perhaps they offer a sample, or to buy the first
package, or to send something on approval, so the
customer may prove the claims without any cost or
risk.



[[PAGE:16]]
   Some of these ads seem altruistic. But they are
based on a knowledge of human nature. The writers
know how people are led to buy.
   Here again is salesmanship. The good salesman
does not merely cry a name. He doesn't say, "Buy my
article." He pictures the customer’s side of his service
until the natural result is to buy.
   A brush maker has some 2,000 canvassers who sell
brushes from house to house. He is enormously
successful in a line which would seem very difficult.
And it would be if his men asked the housewives to
buy.
   But they don't. They go to the door and say, "I was
sent here to give you a brush. I have samples here and
I want you to take your choice."
   The housewife is all smiles and attention. In picking
out one brush she sees several she wants. She is also
anxious to reciprocate the gift. So the salesman gets an
order.
   Another concern sells coffee, etc., by wagons in
some 500 cities. The man drops in with a half-pound of
coffee and says, "Accept this package and try it. I'll
come back in a few days to ask how you like it."
   Even when he comes back he doesn't ask for an
order. He explains that he wants to send the women a
fine kitchen utensil. It isn't free, but if she likes the
[[PAGE:17]]
coffee he will credit five cents on each pound she buys
until she has paid for the article. Always some service.
  The maker of an electric sewing machine motor
found advertising difficult. So, on good advice, he
ceased soliciting a purchase. He offered to send to any
home, through any dealer, a motor for one week’s use.
With it would come a man to show how to operate."Let
us help you for a week without cost or obligation," said
the ad. Such an offer was resistless, and about nine in
ten of the trials led to sales.

   So in many, many lines. Cigar makers send out
boxes to anyone and say, "Smoke ten, then keep them
or return them, as you wish." Makers of books,
typewriters, washing machines, kitchen cabinets,
vacuum sweepers, etc., send out their products
without any prepayment. They say, "Use them a week,
then do as you wish." Practically all merchandise sold
by mail is sent subject to return.
   These are all common principles of salesmanship.
The most ignorant peddler applies them. Yet the
salesman-in-print very often forgets them. He talks
about his interests. He blazons a name, as though that
was of any importance. His phrase is, "Drive people to
the stores," and that is his attitude in everything he
says.

[[PAGE:18]]
   People can be coaxed but not driven. Whatever they
do they do to please themselves. Many fewer mistakes
would be made in advertising if these facts were never
forgotten.




[[PAGE:19]]
                       Chapter 4
                Mail Order Advertising –
                    What It Teaches
   The severest test of an advertising man is in selling
goods by mail. But that is a school from which he must
graduate before he can hope for success. There cost
and result are immediately apparent. False theories
melt away like snowflakes in the sun. The advertising
is profitable or it is not, clearly on the face of returns.
Figures which do not lie tell one at once the merits of
an ad.
   This puts men on their mettle. All guesswork is
eliminated. Every mistake is conspicuous. One quickly
loses his conceit by learning how often his judgment
errs - often nine times in ten.
   There one learns that advertising must be done on a
scientific basis to have any fair chance at success. And
he learns how every wasted dollar adds to the cost of
results.
[[PAGE:20]]
   Here he is a tought efficiency and economy under a
master who can't be fooled. Then, and only then, is he
apt to apply the same principles and keys to all
advertising.
   A man was selling a five-dollar article. The replies
from his ad cost him 85 cents. Another man submitted
an ad which he thought better. The replies cost $14.20
each. Another man submitted an ad which for two
years brought replies at an average of 41 cents each.
   Consider that difference, on 250,000 replies per
year. Think how valuable was the man who cut the
cost in two. Think what it would have meant to have
continued that $14.20 ad without any key on returns.
   Yet there are thousands of advertisers who do just
that. They spend large sums on a guess. And they are
doing what that man did -- paying for sales from 2 to
35 times what they need cost.
   A study of mail order advertising reveals many
things worth learning. It is a prime subject for study.
In the first place, if continued, you know what pays. It
is therefore good advertising as applied to that line.
   The probability is that the ad has resulted from
many traced comparisons. It is therefore the best
advertising yet discovered for that line.
   Study those ads with respect. There is proved
advertising, not theoretical. It will not deceive you.
[[PAGE:21]]
The lessons it teaches are principles which wise men
apply to all advertising.
   Mail order advertising is always set in small type. It
is usually set in smaller type than ordinary print. That
economy of space is universal. So it proves
conclusively that larger type does not pay.
   Remember that when you double your space by
doubling the size of your type. The ad may still be
profitable. But traced returns have proved that you are
paying a double price for sales.
   In mail order advertising there is no waste of space.
Every line is utilized. Borders are rarely used.
Remember that when you are tempted to leave
valuable space unoccupied.
   In mail order advertising there is no palaver. There
is no boasting, save of super-service. There is no
useless talk. There is no attempt at entertainment.
There is nothing to amuse.
   Mail order advertising usually contains a coupon.
That is there to get some action from the converts
partly made. It is there to cut out as a reminder of
something the reader has decided to do.
   Mail order advertisers know that readers forget.
They are reading a magazine of interest. They may be
absorbed in a story. A large percentage of people who
read an ad and decide to act will forget that decision in
[[PAGE:22]]
five minutes. The mail order advertiser knows that
waste by tests, and he does not propose to accept it. So
he inserts that reminder to be cut out, and it turns
when the reader is ready to act.
   In mail order advertising the pictures are always to
the point. They are salesmen in themselves. They earn
the space they occupy. The size is gauged by their
importance. The picture of a dress one is trying to sell
may occupy much space. Less important things get
smaller spaces.
   Pictures in ordinary advertising may teach little.
They probably result from whims. But pictures in mail
order advertising may form half the cost of selling.
And you may be sure that everything about them has
been decided by many comparative tests.
   Before you use useless pictures, merely to decorate
or interest, look over some mail order ads. Mark what
their verdict is.
   A man advertised an incubator to be sold by mail.
Type ads with right headlines brought excellent
returns. But he conceived the idea that a striking
picture would increase those returns. So he increased
his space 50 percent to add a row of chickens in
silhouette.
   It did make a striking ad, but his cost per reply was
increased by exactly that 50 percent. The new ad,
[[PAGE:23]]
costing one-half more for every insertion, brought not
one added sale.
   The man learned that incubator buyers were
practical people. They were looking for attractive
offers, not for pictures.
   Think of the countless untraced campaigns where a
whim of that kind costs half the advertising money
without a penny in return. And it may go on year after
year.
   Mail order advertising tells a complete story if the
purpose is to make an immediate sale. You see no
limitations there on amount of copy.
   The motto there is, "The more you tell the more you
sell." And it has never failed to prove out so in any test
we know.
   Sometimes the advertiser uses small ads,
sometimes large ads. None are too small to tell a
reasonable story. But an ad twice larger brings twice
the returns. A four-times-larger ad brings four times
the returns, and usually some in addition.
   But this occurs only when the larger space is
utilized as well as the small space. Set half-page copy
in a page space and you double the cost of returns. We
have seen many a test prove that.


[[PAGE:24]]
   Look at an ad of the Mead Cycle Company - a typical
mail order ad. These have been running for many
years. The ads are unchanging. Mr. Mead told the
writer that not for $10,000 would he change a single
word in his ads.
   For many years he compared one ad with another.
And the ads you see today are the final result of all
those experiments. Note the picture he uses, the
headlines, the economy of space, the small type. Those
ads are as near perfect for their purpose as an ad can
be.
   So with any other mail order ad which has long
continued. Every feature, every word and picture
teaches advertising at its best. You may not like them.
You may say they are unattractive, crowded, hard to
read – anything you will. But the test of results has
proved those ads the best salesmen those lines have
yet discovered. And they certainly pay.
   Mail order advertising is the court of least resort.
You may get the same instruction, if you will, by
keying other ads. But mail order ads are models. They
are selling goods profitably in a difficult way. It is far
harder to get mail orders than to send buyers to the
stores. It is hard to sell goods which can't be seen. Ads
which do that are excellent examples of what
advertising should be.

[[PAGE:25]]
    We cannot often follow all the principles of mail
order advertising, though we know we should. The
advertiser forces a compromise. Perhaps pride in our
ads has an influence. But every departure from those
principles adds to our selling cost. Therefore it is
always a question of what we are willing to pay for our
frivolities.
    We can at least know what we pay. We can make
keyed comparisons, one ad with another. Whenever
we do we invariably find that the nearer we get to
proved mail order copy the more customers we get for
our money.
    This is another important chapter. Think it over.
What real difference is there between inducing a
customer to order by mail or order from his dealer?
Why should the methods of salesmanship differ?
    They should not. When they do, it is for one of two
reasons. Either the advertiser does not know what the
mail order advertiser knows. He is advertising blindly.
Or he is deliberately sacrificing a percentage of his
returns to gratify some desire.
    There is some apology for that, just as there is for
fine offices and buildings. Most of us can afford to do
something for pride and opinion. But let us know what
we are doing. Let us know the cost of our pride. Then,
if our advertising fails to bring the wanted returns, let
[[PAGE:26]]
us go back to our model – a good mail order ad – and
eliminate some of our waste.




[[PAGE:27]]
                     Chapter 5
                    Headlines
   The difference between advertising and personal
salesmanship lies largely in personal contact. The
salesman is there to demand attention. He cannot well
be ignored. The advertisement can be ignored.
   But the salesman wastes much of his time on
prospects whom he never can hope to interest. He
cannot pick them out. The advertisement is read only
by interested people who, by their own volition, study
what we have to say.
   The purpose of a headline is to pick out people you
can interest. You wish to talk to someone in a crowd.
So the first thing you say is, "Hey there, Bill Jones" to
get the right person’s attention.
   So it is in an advertisement. What you have will
interest certain people only, and for certain reasons.
You care only for those people. Then create a headline
which will hail those people only.

[[PAGE:28]]
   Perhaps a blind headline or some clever conceit will
attract many times as many. But they may consist of
mostly impossible subjects for what you have to offer.
And the people you are after may never realize that
the ad refers to something they may want.
   Headlines on ads are like headlines on news items.
Nobody reads a whole newspaper. One is interested in
financial news, one in political, one in society, one in
cookery, one in sports, etc. There are whole pages in
any newspaper which we never scan at all. Yet other
people may turn directly to those pages.
   We pick out what we wish to read by headlines, and
we don't want those headlines misleading. The writing
of headlines is one of the greatest journalistic arts.
They either conceal or reveal an interest.
   Suppose a newspaper article stated that a certain
woman was the most beautiful in the city. That article
would be of intense interest to that woman and her
friends. But neither she nor her friends would ever
read it if the headline was "Egyptian Psychology."
   So in advertising. It is commonly said that people do
not read advertisements. That is silly, of course. We
who spend millions in advertising and watch the
returns marvel at the readers we get. Again and again
we see 20 percent of all the readers of a newspaper
cut out a certain coupon.
[[PAGE:29]]
   But people do not read ads for amusement. They
don't read ads which, at a glance, seem to offer nothing
interesting. A double-page ad on women's dresses will
not gain a glance from a man. Nor will a shaving cream
ad from a woman.
   Always bear these facts in mind. People are hurried.
The average person worth cultivating has too much to
read. They skip three-fourths of the reading matter
which they pay to get. They are not going to read your
business talk unless you make it worth their while and
let the headline show it.
   People will not be bored in print. They may listen
politely at a dinner table to boasts and personalities,
life histories, etc. But in print they choose their own
companions, their own subjects. They want to be
amused or benefited. They want economy, beauty,
labor saving, good things to eat and wear. There may
be products which interest them more than anything
else in the magazine. But they will never know it
unless the headline or the picture tells them.
   The writer of this chapter spends far more time on
headlines than on writing. He often spends hours on a
single headline. Often scores of headlines are
discarded before the right one is selected. For the
entire return from an ad depends on attracting the


[[PAGE:30]]
right sort of readers. The best of salesmanship has no
chance whatever unless we get a hearing.
   The vast difference in headlines is shown by keyed
returns which this book advocates. The identical ad
run with various headlines differs tremendously in its
returns. It is not uncommon for a change in headlines
to multiply returns from five to ten times over.
   So we compare headlines until we know what sort
of appeal pays best. That differs in every line, of
course.
   The writer has before him keyed returns on nearly
two thousand headlines used on a single product. The
story in these ads is nearly identical. But the returns
vary enormously, due to the headlines. So with every
keyed return in our record appears the headline that
we used.
   Thus we learn what type of headline has the most
widespread appeal. The product has many uses. It
fosters beauty. It prevents disease. It aides daintiness
and cleanliness. We learn to exactness which quality
most of our readers seek.
   This does not mean we neglect the others. One sort
of appeal may bring half the returns of another, yet be
important enough to be profitable. We overlook no
field that pays. But we know what proportion of our
ads should, in the headline, attract any certain class.
[[PAGE:31]]
   For this same reason we employ a vast variety of
ads. If we are using twenty magazines we may use
twenty separate ads. This because circulations
overlap, and because a considerable percentage of
people are attracted by each of several forms of
approach. We wish to reach them all.
   On a soap, for instance, the headline "Keep Clean"
might attract a very small percentage. It is too
commonplace. So might the headline, "No animal fats."
People may not care much about that. The headline, "It
floats" might prove interesting. But a headline
referring to beauty or complexion might attract many
times as many.
   An automobile ad might refer in the headline to a
good universal joint. It might fall flat, because so few
buyers think of universal joints. The same ad with a
headline, "The Sportiest of Sport Bodies," might
outpull the other fifty to one.
   This is enough to suggest the importance of
headlines. Anyone who keys ads will be amazed at the
difference. The appeals we like best will rarely prove
best, because we do not know enough people to
average up their desires. So we learn on each line by
experiment.
   But back of all lie fixed principles. You are
presenting an ad to millions. Among them is a
[[PAGE:32]]
percentage, small or large, whom you hope to interest.
Go after that percentage and try to strike the chord
that responds. If you are advertising corsets, men and
children don't interest you. If you are advertising
cigars, you have no use for non-smokers. Razors won't
attract women, rouge will not interest men.
   Don't think that those millions will read your ads to
find out if your product interests. They will decide at a
glance – by your headline or your pictures. Address
the people you seek, and them only.




[[PAGE:33]]
                    Chapter 6
                   Psychology
   The competent advertising man must understand
psychology. The more he knows about it the better. He
must learn that certain effects lead to certain
reactions, and use that knowledge to increase results
and avoid mistakes.
   Human nature is perpetual. In most respects it is the
same today as in the time of Caesar. So the principles
of psychology are fixed and enduring. You will never
need to unlearn what you learn about them.
   We learn, for instance, that curiosity is one of the
strongest of human incentives. We employ it
whenever we can. Puffed Wheat and Puffed Rice were
made successful largely through curiosity. "Grains
puffed to 8 times the normal size." "Foods shot from
guns." "125 million steam explosions caused in every
kernel." These foods were failures before that factor
was discovered.

[[PAGE:34]]
    We learn that cheapness is not a strong appeal.
Americans are extravagant. They want bargains but
not cheapness. They want to feel that they can afford
to eat and have and wear the best. Treat them as
though they could not and they resent your attitude.
    We learn that people judge largely by price. They
are not experts. In the British National Gallery is a
painting which is announced in a catalog to have cost
$750,000. Most people at first pass it by at a glance.
Then later they get farther on in the catalog and learn
what the painting cost. They return then and surround
it.
    A department store advertised at one Easter time a
$1,000 hat, and the floor could not hold the women
who came to see it.
    We often employ this factor in psychology. Perhaps
we are advertising a valuable formula. To merely say
that would not be impressive. So we state – as a fact –
that we paid $100,000 for that formula. That
statement when tried has won a wealth of respect.
    Many articles are sold under guarantee – so
commonly sold that guarantees have ceased to be
impressive. But one concern made a fortune by
offering a dealer’s signed warrant. The dealer to whom
one paid his money agreed in writing to pay it back if
asked. Instead of a far-away stranger, a neighbor gave
[[PAGE:35]]
the warrant. The results have led many to try that
plan, and it has always proved effective.
   Many have advertised, "Try it for a week. If you
don't like it we'll return your money.” Then someone
conceived the idea of sending goods without any
money down, and saying, "Pay in a week if you like
them." That proved many times as impressive.
   One great advertising man stated the difference this
way: "Two men came to me, each offering me a horse.
Both made equal claims. They were good horses, kind
and gentle. A child could drive them. One man said,
‘Try the horse for a week. If my claims are not true,
come back for your money.’ The other man also said,
‘Try the horse for a week.’ But he added, ‘Come and
pay me then.’ I naturally bought the second man’s
horse."
   Now countless things – cigars, typewriters, washing
machines, books, etc. - are sent out in this way on
approval. And we find that people are honest. The
losses are very small.
   An advertiser offered a set of books to business
men. The advertising was unprofitable, so he
consulted another expert. The ads were impressive.
The offer seemed attractive, "But," said the second
man, "let us add one little touch which I have found
effective. Let us offer to put the buyer’s name in gilt
[[PAGE:36]]
lettering on each book." That was done, and with
scarcely another change in the ads they sold some
hundreds of thousands of books. Through some
peculiar kink in human psychology that name in gilt
gave much added value to the books.
   Many send out small gifts, like memorandum books,
to customers and prospects. They get very small
results. One man sent out a letter to the effect that he
had a leather-covered book with a man’s name on it. It
was waiting for him and would be sent on request. The
form of request was enclosed, and it also asked for
certain information. That information indicated lines
on which a man might be sold.
   Nearly all men, it was found, filled out that request
and supplied the information. When a man knows that
something belongs to him – something with his name
on – he will make the effort to get it, even though the
thing is a trifle.
   In the same way it is found that an offer limited to a
certain class of people is far more effective than a
general offer. For instance, an offer limited to veterans
of the war. Or to members of a lodge or sect. Or to
executives. Those who are entitled to any seeming
advantage will go a long way not to lose that
advantage.


[[PAGE:37]]
   An advertiser suffered much from substitution. He
said, "Look out for substitutes," "Be sure you get this
brand," etc., with no effect. Those were selfish appeals.
   Then he said, "Try our rivals too" – said it in his
headlines. He invited comparisons and showed that he
did not fear them. That corrected the situation. Buyers
were careful to get the brand so conspicuously
superior that its maker could court a trial of the rest.
   Two advertisers offered food products nearly
identical. Both offered a full-size package as an
introduction. But one gave his package free. The other
bought the package. A coupon was good at any store
for a package, for which the maker paid retail price.
   The first advertiser failed and the second
succeeded. The first even lost a large part of the trade
he had. He cheapened his product by giving a 15-cent
package away. It is hard to pay for an article which has
once been free. It is like paying railroad fare after
traveling on a pass.
   The other gained added respect for his article by
paying retail price to let the user try it. An article good
enough for the maker to buy is good enough for the
user to buy. It is vastly different to pay 15 cents to let
you try an article than to simply say "It's free."
   So with sampling. Hand an unwanted product to a
housewife and she pays it slight respect. She is no
[[PAGE:38]]
mood to see its virtues. But get her to ask for a sample
after reading your story, and she is in a very different
position. She knows your claims. She is interested in
them, else she would not act. And she expects to find
the qualities you told.
   There is a great deal in mental impression. Submit
five articles exactly alike and five people may choose
one of them. But point out in one some qualities to
notice and everyone will find them. The five people
then will all choose the same article.
   If people can be made sick or well by mental
impressions, they can be made to favor a certain brand
in that way. And that, on some lines, is the only way to
win them.
   Two concerns, side by side, sold women's clothing
on installments. The appeal, of course, was to poor
girls who desired to dress better. One treated them
like poor girls and made the bare business offer.
   The other put a woman in charge – a motherly,
dignified, capable woman. They did business in her
name. They used her picture. She signed all ads and
letters. She wrote to these girls like a friend. She knew
herself what it meant to a girl not to be able to dress
her best. She had long sought a chance to supply
women good clothes and give them all season to pay.


[[PAGE:39]]
Now she was able to do so, with the aid of men behind
her.
   There was no comparison in those two appeals. It
was not long before this woman’s long-established
next-door rival had to quit.
   The backers of this business sold housefurnishings
on installments. Sending out catalogs promiscuously
did not pay. Offering long-time credit often seems like
a reflection.
   But when a married woman bought garments from
Mrs. ____, and paid as agreed, they wrote to her
something like this: "Mrs. ____, whom we know, tells us
that you are one of her good customers. She has dealt
with you, she says, and you do just as you agree. So we
have opened with you a credit account on our books,
good any time you wish. When you want anything in
furnishings, just order it. Pay nothing in advance. We
are very glad to send it without any investigation to a
person recommended as you are.”
   That was flattering. Naturally those people, when
they wanted some furniture, would order from that
house.
   There are endless phases to psychology. Some
people know them by instinct. Many of them are
taught by experience. But we learn most of them from

[[PAGE:40]]
others. When we see one winning method we note it
down for use when occasion offers.
  These things are very important. An identical offer
made in a different way may bring multiplied returns.
Somewhere in the mines of business experience we
must find the best method somehow.




[[PAGE:41]]
                    Chapter 7
                 Being Specific
   Platitudes and generalities roll off the human
understanding like water from a duck. They leave no
impression whatever. To say, "Best in the world,"
"Lowest prices in existence," etc. are at best simply
claiming the expected. But superlatives of that sort are
usually damaging. They suggest looseness of
expression, a tendency to exaggerate, a carelessness
truth. They lead readers to discount all the statements
that you make.
   People recognize a certain license in selling talk as
they do poetry. A man may say, "Supreme in quality"
without seeming a liar, though one may know that the
other brands are equally as good. One expects a
salesman to put his best foot forward and excuses
some exaggeration born of enthusiasm. But just for
that reason general statements count for little. And a


[[PAGE:42]]
man inclined to superlatives must expect that his
every statement will be taken with some caution.
   But a man who makes a specific claim is either
telling the truth or a lie. People do not expect an
advertiser to lie. They know that he can't lie in the best
mediums. The growing respect in advertising has
largely come through a growing regard for its truth.
   So a definite statement is usually accepted. Actual
figures are not generally discounted. Specific facts,
when stated, have their full weight and effect.
   This is very important to consider in written or
personal salesmanship. The weight of an argument
may often be multiplied by making it specific. Say that
a tungsten lamp gives more light than a carbon and
you leave some doubt. Say it gives three and one-third
times the light and people realize that you have made
tests and comparisons.
   A dealer may say, "Our prices have been reduced"
without creating any marked impression. But when he
says "Our prices have been reduced 25 percent" he
gets the full value of his announcement.
   A mail order advertiser sold women's clothing to
people of the poorer classes. For years he used the
slogan, "Lowest prices in America." His rivals all
copied that. Then he guaranteed to undersell any other
dealer. His rivals did likewise. Soon those claims
[[PAGE:43]]
became common to every advertiser in his line, and
they became commonplace.
   Then under able advice, he changed his statement to
"Our net profit is 3 percent." That was a definite
statement and it proved very impressive. With their
volume of business it was evident that their prices
must be minimum. No one could be expected to do
business on less than 3 percent. The next year their
business made a sensational increase.
   At one time in the automobile business there was a
general impression that profits were excessive. One
well-advised advertiser came out with the statement,
"Our profit is 9 percent." Then he cited actual costs on
the hidden costs of a $1,500 car. They amounted to
$735, without including anything one could easily see.
This advertiser made a great success along those lines
at that time.
   Shaving soaps have long been advertised "Abundant
lather," "Does not dry on the face," "Acts quickly," etc.
One advertiser had as good a chance as another to
impress those claims.
   Then a new maker came into the field. It was a
tremendously difficult field, for every customer had to
be taken from someone else. He stated specific facts.
He said, “Multiplies itself in lather 250 times.” "Softens
the beard in one minute." "Maintains its creamy
[[PAGE:44]]
fullness for ten minutes on the face." "The final result
of testing and comparing 130 formulas." Perhaps
never in advertising has there been a quicker and
greater success in an equally difficult field.
   Makers of safety razors have long advertised quick
shaves. One maker advertised a 78-second shave. That
was definite. It indicated actual tests. That man at once
made a sensational advance in his sales.
   In the old days all beers were advertised as "Pure."
The claim made no impression. The bigger the type
used, the bigger the folly. After millions had been
spent to impress a platitude, one brewer pictured a
plate glass room where beer was cooled in filtered air.
He pictured a filter of white wood pulp through which
every drop was cleared. He told how bottles were
washed four times by machinery. How he went down
4,000 feet for pure water. How 1,018 experiments had
been made to attain a yeast to give beer that matchless
flavor. And how all the yeast was forever made from
that adopted mother cell.
   All claims were such as any brewer might have
made. They were mere essentials in ordinary brewing.
But he was the first to tell the people about them,
while others cried merely "pure beer." He made the
greatest success that was ever made in beer
advertising.

[[PAGE:45]]
    "Used the world over" is a very elastic claim. Then
one advertiser said, "Used by the peoples of 52
nations," and many another has followed.
    One statement may take as much room as another,
yet a definite statement be many times as effective.
The difference is vast. If a claim is worth making, make
it in the most impressive way.
    All these effects must be studied. Salesmanship-in-
print is very expensive. Every word you use may cost
$10 to insert. A salesman's loose talk matters little. But
when you are talking to millions at enormous cost, the
weight of your claims is important.
    No generality has any weight whatever. It is like
saying "How do you do?" When you have no intention
of inquiring about one’s health. But specific claims
when made in print are taken at their value.




[[PAGE:46]]
                    Chapter 8
                Tell Your Full Story
   Whatever claim you use to gain attention, the
advertisement should tell a story reasonably complete.
If you watch returns, you will find that certain claims
appeal far more than others. But in usual lines a
number of claims appeal to a large percentage. Then
present those claims in every ad for their effect on that
percentage.
   Some advertisers, for the sake of brevity, present
one claim at a time. Or they write a serial ad,
continued in another issue. There is no greater folly.
Those serials almost never connect.
   When you once get a person’s attention, then is the
time to accomplish all you can ever hope with him.
Bring all your good arguments to bear. Cover every
phase of your subject. One fact appeals to some, one to
another. Omit any one and a certain percentage will
lose the fact which might convince.
[[PAGE:47]]
   People are not apt to read successive
advertisements on any single line. No more than you
read a news item twice, or a story. In one reading of an
advertisement one decides for or against a
proposition. And that operates against a second
reading. So present to the reader, when once you get
him, every important claim you have.
   The best advertisers do that. They learn their
appealing claims by tests – by comparing results from
various headlines. Gradually they accumulate a list of
claims important enough to use. All those claims
appear in every ad thereafter.
   The advertisements seem monotonous to the men
who read them all. A complete story is always the
same. But one must consider that the average reader is
only once a reader, probably. And what you fail to tell
him in that ad is something he may never know.
   Some advertisers go so far as to never change their
ads. Single mail order ads often run year after year
without diminishing returns. So with some general
ads. They are perfected ads, embodying in the best
way known all that one has to say. Advertisers do not
expect a second reading. Their constant returns come
from getting new readers.
   In every ad consider only new customers. People
using your product are not going to read your ads.
[[PAGE:48]]
They have already read and decided. You might
advertise month after month to present users that the
product they use is poison, and they would never
know it. So never waste one line of your space to say
something to present users, unless you can say it in
headlines. Bear in mind always that you can address
an unconverted prospect.
   Any reader of your ad is interested, else he would
not be a reader. You are dealing with someone willing
to listen. Then do your level best. That reader, if you
lose him now, may never again be a reader.
   You are like a salesman in a busy man’s office. He
may have tried again and again to get entree. He may
never be admitted again. This is his one chance to get
action, and he must employ it to the full.
   This again brings up the question of brevity. The
most common expression you hear about advertising
is that people will not read much. Yet a vast amount of
the best-paying advertising shows that people do read
much. Then they write for a book, perhaps – for added
information.
   There is no fixed rule on this subject of brevity. One
sentence may tell a complete story on a line like
chewing gum. It may on an article like Cream of Wheat.
But, whether long or short, an advertising story should
be reasonably complete.
[[PAGE:49]]
   A certain man desired a personal car. He cared little
about the price. He wanted a car to take pride in, else
he felt he would never drive it. But, being a good
business man, he wanted value for his money.
   His inclination was towards a Rolls-Royce. He also
considered a Pierce-Arrow, a Locomobile and others.
But these famous cars offered no information. Their
advertisements were very short. Evidently the makers
considered it undignified to argue comparative merits.
   The Marmon, on the contrary, told a complete story.
He read columns and books about it. So he bought a
Marmon, and was never sorry. But he afterwards
learned facts about another car at nearly three times
the price which would have sold him that car had he
known them.
   What folly it is to cry a name in a line like that, plus
a few brief generalities. A car may be a lifetime
investment. It involves an important expenditure. A
man interested enough to buy a car will read a volume
about it if the volume is interesting.
   So with everything. You may be simply trying to
change a woman from one breakfast food to another,
or one tooth paste, or one soap. She is wedded to what
she is using. Perhaps she has used it for years.
   You have a hard proposition. If you do not believe it,
go to her in person and try to make the change. Not to
[[PAGE:50]]
merely buy a first package to please you, but to adopt
your brand. A man who once does that at a woman’s
door won't argue for brief advertisements. He will
never again say, "A sentence will do," or a name or a
claim or a boast.
   Nor will the man who traces his results. Note that
brief ads are never keyed. Note that every traced ad
tells a complete story, though it takes columns to tell.
   Never be guided in any way by ads which are
untraced. Never do anything because some
uninformed advertiser considers that something right.
Never be led in new paths by the blind. Apply to your
advertising ordinary common sense. Take the opinion
of nobody, the verdict of nobody, who knows nothing
about his returns.




[[PAGE:51]]
                    Chapter 9
                Art In Advertising
   Pictures in advertising are very expensive. Not in
the cost of good art work alone, but in the cost of
space. From one-third to one-half of an advertising
campaign is often staked on the power of the pictures.
   Anything expensive must be effective, else it
involves much waste. So art in advertising is a study of
paramount importance.
   Pictures should not be used merely because they
are interesting. Or to attract attention. Or to decorate
an ad. We have covered these points elsewhere. Ads
are not written to interest, please or amuse. You are
not writing to please the hoi-polloi. You are writing on
a serious subject – the subject of money-spending. And
you address a restricted minority.
   Use pictures only to attract those who may profit
you. Use them only when they form a better selling
argument than the same amount of space set in type.
[[PAGE:52]]
   Mail order advertisers, as we have said, have
pictures down to a science. Some use large pictures,
some use small, some omit pictures entirely. A
noticeable fact is that none of them uses expensive art
work. Be sure that all these things are done for
reasons made apparent by results.
   Any other advertiser should apply the same
principles. Or, if none exist which apply to his line, he
should work out his own by tests. It is certainly unwise
to spend large sums on a dubious adventure.
   Pictures in many lines form a major factor. Omitting
the lines where the article itself should be pictured. In
some lines, like Arrow Collars and most in clothing
advertising, pictures have proved most convincing.
Not only in picturing the collar or the clothes, but in
picturing men whom others envy, in surroundings
which others covet. The pictures subtly suggest that
these articles of apparel will aid men to those desired
positions.
   So with correspondence schools. Theirs is traced
advertising. Picturing men in high positions or taking
upward steps forms a very convincing argument.
   So with beauty articles. Picturing beautiful women,
admired and attractive, is a supreme inducement. But
there is a great advantage in including a fascinated
man. Women desire beauty largely because of men.
[[PAGE:53]]
Then show them using their beauty, as women do use
it, to gain maximum effect.
    Advertising pictures should not be eccentric. Don't
treat your subject lightly. Don't lessen respect for
yourself or your article by any attempt at frivolity.
People do not patronize a clown. There are two things
about which men should never joke. One is business,
one is home.
    An eccentric picture may do you serious damage.
One may gain attention by wearing a fool’s cap. But he
would ruin his selling prospects.
    Then a picture which is eccentric or unique takes
attention from your subject. You cannot afford to do
that. Your main appeal lies in your headline. Over-
shadow that and you kill it. Don't, to gain general and
useless attention, sacrifice the attention that you want.
    Don't be like a salesman who wears conspicuous
clothes. The small percentage he appeals to are not
usually good buyers. The great majority of the sane
and thrifty heartily despise him. Be normal in
everything you do when you are seeking confidence
and conviction.
    Generalities cannot be applied to art. There are
seeming exceptions to most statements. Each line
must be studied by itself.

[[PAGE:54]]
   But the picture must help sell the goods. It should
help more than anything else could do in like space,
else use that something else.
   Many pictures tell a story better than type can do. In
the advertising of Puffed Grains the pictures of the
grains were found to be most effective. They awake
curiosity. No figure drawings in that case compare in
results with these grains.
   Other pictures form a total loss. We have cited cases
of that kind. The only way to know, as is with most
other questions, is by compared results.
   There are disputed questions in art work which we
will cite without expressing opinions. They seem to be
answered both ways, according to the line which is
advertised.
   Does it pay better to use fine art work or ordinary?
Some advertisers pay up to $2,000 per drawing. They
figure that the space is expensive. The art cost is small
in comparison. So they consider the best worth its
cost.
   Others argue that few people have art education.
The art judges form a percentage too small to
consider. They bring out their ideas, and bring them
out well, at a fraction of the cost. Mail order
advertisers are generally in this class.

[[PAGE:55]]
   The question is one of small moment. Certainly
good art pays as well as mediocre. And the cost of
preparing ads is very small compared with the cost of
insertion.
   Should every ad have a new picture? Or may a
picture be repeated? Both viewpoints have many
supporters. The probability is that repetition is an
economy. We are after new customers always. It is not
probably that they remember a picture we have used
before. If they do, repetition does not detract.
   Do color pictures pay better than black and white?
Not generally, according to the evidence we have
gathered to date. Yet there are exceptions. Certain
food dishes look far better in colors. Tests on lines like
oranges, desserts, etc. show that color pays. Color
comes close to placing the products on actual
exhibition.
   But color used to amuse or to gain attention is like
anything else that we use for that purpose. It may
attract many times as many people, yet not secure a
hearing from as many whom we want.
   The general rule applies. Do nothing to merely
interest, amuse, or attract. That is not your province.
Do only that which wins the people you are after in the
cheapest possible way.


[[PAGE:56]]
  But these are minor questions. They are mere
economies, not largely affecting the results of a
campaign.
  Some things you do may cut all your results in two.
Other things can be done which multiply those results.
Minor costs are insignificant when compared with
basic principles. One man may do business in a shed,
another in a palace. That is immaterial. The great
question is, one’s power to get the maximum results.




[[PAGE:57]]
                   Chapter 10
                Things Too Costly
  Many things are possible in advertising which are
too costly to attempt. That is another reason why
every project and method should be weighed and
determined by a known scale of cost and result.
  Changing people’s habits is very expensive. A
project which involves that must be seriously
considered. To sell shaving soap to the peasants of
Russia one would first need to change their beard-
wearing habits. The cost would be excessive. Yet
countless advertisers try to do things almost as
impossible. Just because questions are not ably
considered, and results are untraced and unknown.
  For instance, the advertiser of a dentifrice may
spend much space and money to educate people to
brush their teeth. Tests which we know of have
indicated that the cost of such converts may run from
$20 to $25 each. Not only because of the difficulty, but
[[PAGE:58]]
because much of the advertising goes to people
already converted.
   Such a cost, of course, is unthinkable. One might not
in a lifetime get it back in sales. The maker who
learned these facts by tests makes no attempt to
educate people to the tooth brush habit. What cannot
be done on a large scale profitably cannot be done on a
small scale. So not one line in any ad is devoted to this
object. This maker, who is constantly guided in
everything by keying every ad, has made remarkable
success.
   Another dentifrice maker spends much money to
make converts to the tooth brush. The object is
commendable, but altruistic. The new business he
creates is shared by his rivals. He is wondering why
his sales increase is in no way commensurate with his
expenditure.
   An advertiser at one time spent much money to
educate people to the use of oatmeal. The results were
too small to discover. All people know of oatmeal. As a
food for children it has age-old fame. Doctors have
advised it for many generations. People who don't
serve oatmeal are therefore difficult to start. Perhaps
their objections are insurmountable. Anyway, the cost
proved to be beyond all possible return.


[[PAGE:59]]
   There are many advertisers who know facts like
these and concede them. They would not think of
devoting a whole campaign to any such impossible
object. Yet they devote a share of their space to that
object. That is only the same folly on a smaller scale. It
is not good business.
   No one orange grower or raisin grower could
attempt to increase the consumption of those fruits.
The cost might be a thousand times his share of the
returns. But thousands of growers combined have
done it on those and many other lines. There lies one
of the great possibilities of advertising development.
The general consumption of scores of foods can be
profitably increased. But it must be done through wide
co-operation.
   No advertiser could afford to educate people on
vitamins or germicides. Such things are done by
authorities, through countless columns of unpaid-for
space. But great successes have been made by going to
people already educated and satisfying their created
wants.
   It is a very shrewd thing to watch the development
of a popular trend, the creation of new desires. Then at
the right time offer to satisfy those desires. That was
done on yeasts, for instance, and on numerous
antiseptics. It can every year be done on new things

[[PAGE:60]]
which some popular fashion or widespread influence
is bringing into vogue. But it is a very different thing to
create that fashion, taste or influence for all in your
field to share.
    There are some things we know of which might
possibly be sold to half the homes in the country. A
Dakin-fluid germicide, for instance. But the
consumption would be very small. A small bottle
might last for years. Customers might cost $1.50 each.
And the revenue per customer might not in ten years
repay the cost of getting.
    Mail order sales on single articles, however popular,
rarely cost less that $2.50 each. It is reasonable to
suppose that sales made through dealers on like
articles will cost approximately as much. Those facts
must be considered on any one-sale article. Possibly
one user will win others. But traced returns as in mail
order advertising would prohibit much advertising
which is now being done.
    Costly mistakes are made by blindly following some
ill-conceived idea. An article, for instance, may have
many uses, one of which is to prevent disease.
Prevention is not a popular subject, however much it
should be. People will do much to cure trouble, but
people in general will do little to prevent it. This has
been proved my many disappointments.

[[PAGE:61]]
   One may spend much money in arguing prevention
when the same money spent on another claim would
bring many times the sales. A heading which asserts
one claim may bring ten times the results of a heading
which asserts another. An advertiser may go far astray
unless he finds out.
   A tooth paste may tend to prevent decay. It may also
beautify teeth. Tests will probably show that the latter
appeal is many times as strong as the former. The
most successful tooth paste advertiser never features
tooth troubles in his headlines. Tests have proved
them unappealing. Other advertisers in this line center
on those troubles. That is often because results are not
known and compared.
   A soap may tend to cure eczema. It may at the same
time improve the complexion. The eczema claim may
appeal to one in a hundred while the beauty claims
would appeal to nearly all. To even mention the
eczema claims might destroy the beauty claim.
   A man has a relief for asthma. It has done so much
for him he considers it a great advertising possibility.
We have no statistics on this subject. We do not know
the percentage of people who suffer from asthma. A
canvass might show it to be one in a hundred. If so, he
would need to cover a hundred useless readers to
reach one he wants. His cost of result might be twenty

[[PAGE:62]]
times as high as on another article which appeals to
one in five. That excessive cost would probably mean
disaster. For reasons like these every new advertiser
should seek for wise advice. No one with the interests
of advertising at heart will advise any dubious
venture.
   Some claims not popular enough to feature in the
main are still popular enough to consider. They
influence a certain number of people – say one-fourth
of your possible customers. Such a claim may be
featured to advantage in a certain percentage of
headlines. It should probably be included in every
advertisement. But those are not things to guess at.
They should be decided by actual knowledge, usually
by traced returns.
   This chapter, like every chapter, points out a very
important reason for knowing your results. Scientific
advertising is impossible without that. So is safe
advertising. So is maximum profit.
   Groping in the dark in this field has probably cost
enough money to pay the national debt. That is what
has filled the advertising graveyards. That is what has
discouraged thousands who could profit in this field.
And the dawn of knowledge is what is bringing a new
day in the advertising world.


[[PAGE:63]]
                   Chapter 11
                  Information
   An ad-writer, to have a chance at success, must gain
full information on his subject. The library of an
advertising agency should have books on every line
that calls for research. A painstaking advertising man
will often read for weeks on some problem which
comes up.
   Perhaps in many volumes he will find few facts to
use. But some one fact may be the keystone of success.
   This writer has just completed an enormous
amount of reading, medical and otherwise, on coffee.
This is to advertise a coffee without caffeine. One
scientific article out of a thousand perused gave the
keynote for that campaign. It was the fact that caffeine
stimulation comes two hours after drinking. So the
immediate bracing effects which people seek from
coffee do not come from the caffeine. Removing

[[PAGE:64]]
caffeine does not remove the kick. It does not modify
coffee’s delights, for caffeine is tasteless and odorless.
   Caffeineless coffee has been advertised for years.
People regarded it like near-beer. Only through weeks
of reading did we find a way to put it in another light.
   To advertise a tooth paste this writer has also read
many volumes of scientific matter dry as dust. But in
the middle of one volume he found the idea which has
helped make millions for that tooth paste maker. And
has made this campaign one of the sensations of
advertising.
   Genius is the art of taking pains. The advertising
man who spares the midnight oil will never get very
far.
   Before advertising a food product, 130 men were
employed for weeks to interview all classes of
consumers.
   On another line, letters were sent to 12,000
physicians. Questionnaires are often mailed to tens of
thousands of men and women to get the viewpoint of
consumers.
   A $25,000-a-year man, before advertising outfits for
acetylene gas, spent weeks in going from farm to farm.
Another man did that on a tractor.


[[PAGE:65]]
   Before advertising a shaving cream, one thousand
men were asked to state what they most desired in a
shaving soap.
   Called on to advertise pork and beans, a canvass
was made of some thousands of homes. Theretofore
all pork and bean advertising has been based on "Buy
my brand." That canvass showed that only 4 percent of
the people used any canned pork and beans. Ninety-
six percent baked their beans at home.
   The problem was not to sell a particular brand. Any
such attempt appealed to only four percent. The right
appeal was to win the people away from home-baked
beans. The advertising, which without that knowledge
must have failed, proved a great success.
   A canvas is made, not only of homes, but of dealers.
Competition is measured up.
   Every advertiser of a similar product is written for
his literature and claims. Thus we start with exact
information on all that our rivals are doing.
   Clipping bureaus are patronized, so that everything
printed on our subject comes to the man who writes
ads.
   Every comment which comes from consumers or
dealers goes to this man’s desk.


[[PAGE:66]]
   It is often necessary in a line to learn the total
expenditure. We must learn what a user spends a year,
else we shall not know if users are worth the cost of
getting.
   We must learn the total consumption, else we may
overspend.
   We must learn the percentage of readers to whom
our product appeals. We must often gather this data
on classes. The percentage may differ on farms and in
cities. The cost of advertising largely depends on the
percentage of waste circulation.
   Thus an advertising campaign is usually preceded
by a very large volume of data. Even an experimental
campaign, for effective experiments cost a great deal
of work and time.
   Often chemists are employed to prove or disprove
doubtful claims. An advertiser, in all good faith, makes
an impressive assertion. If it is true, it will form a big
factor in advertising. If untrue, it may prove a
boomerang. And it may bar our ads from good
mediums. It is remarkable how often a maker proves
wrong on assertions he had made for years.
   Impressive claims are made far more impressive by
making them exact. So, many experiments are made to
get the actual figures. For instance, a certain drink is
known to have a large food value. That simple
[[PAGE:67]]
assertion is not very convincing. So we send the drink
to the laboratory and find that its food value is 425
calories per pint. One pint is equal to six eggs in
calories of nutriment. That claim makes a great
impression.
   In every line involving scientific details a censor is
appointed. The ad-writer, however well informed, may
draw wrong inferences from facts. So an authority
passes on every advertisement.
   The uninformed would be staggered to know the
amount of work involved in a single ad. Weeks of work
sometimes. The ad seems so simple, and it must be
simple to appeal to simple people. But back of that ad
may lie reams of data, volumes of information, months
of research.
   So this is no lazy mans field.




[[PAGE:68]]
                   Chapter 12
                     Strategy
   Advertising is much like war, minus the venom. Or
much, if you prefer, like a game of chess. We are
usually out to capture others' citadels or garner
others' trade.
   We must have skill and knowledge. We must have
training and experience, also right equipment. We
must have proper ammunition, and enough. We dare
not underestimate opponents. Our intelligence
department is a vital factor, as told in the previous
chapter. We need alliances with dealers, as another
chapter tells. We also need strategy of the ablest sort,
to multiply the value of our forces.
   Sometimes in new campaigns comes the question of
a name. That may be most important. Often the right
name is an advertisement in itself. It may tell a fairly
complete story, like Shredded Wheat, Cream of Wheat,
Puffed Rice, Spearmint Gum, Palmolive Soap, etc.
[[PAGE:69]]
   That may be a great advantage. The name is usually
conspicuously displayed. Many a name has proved to
be the greatest factor in an article’s success. Other
names prove a distinct disadvantage – Toasted Corn
Flakes, for instance. Too many others may share a
demand with the man who builds it up.
   Many coined names without meaning have
succeeded. Kodak, Karo, Mazda etc. are examples.
They are exclusive. The advertiser who gives them
meaning never needs to share his advantage. But a
significant name which helps to impress a dominant
claim is certainly a great advantage. Names which tell
stories have been worth millions of dollars. So a great
deal of research often precedes the selection of a
name.
   Sometimes a price must be decided. A high price
creates resistance. It tends to limit one’s field. The cost
of getting an added profit may be more than the profit.
   It is a well-known fact that the greatest profits are
made on great volume at small profit. Campbell's
Soups, Palmolive Soap, Karo Syrup and Ford cars are
conspicuous examples. A price which appeals only to –
say 10 percent – multiplies the cost of selling.
   But on other lines high price is unimportant. High
profit is essential. The line may have a small sale per
customer. One hardly cares what he pays for a corn
[[PAGE:70]]
remedy because he uses little. The maker must have a
large margin because of small consumption.
   On other lines a higher price may even be an
inducement. Such lines are judged largely by price. A
product which costs more than the ordinary is
considered above the ordinary. So the price question is
always a very big factor in strategy.
   Competition must be considered. What are the
forces against you? What have they in price or quality
or claims to weigh against your appeal? What have you
to win trade against them? What have you to hold
trade against them when you get it?
   How strongly are your rivals entrenched? There are
some fields which are almost impregnable. They are
usually lines which created a new habit or custom and
which typify that custom with consumers. They so
dominate a field that one can hardly hope to invade it.
They have the volume, the profit to make a
tremendous fight.
   Such fields are being constantly invaded. But it is
done through some convincing advantage, or through
very superior salesmanship-in-print.
   Other lines are only less difficult. A new shaving
soap, as an example. About every possible customer is
using a rival soap. Most of them are satisfied with it.
Many are wedded to it. The appeal must be strong
[[PAGE:71]]
enough to win those people from long-established
favor.
   Such things are not accomplished by haphazard
efforts. Not by considering people in the mass and
making blind stabs for their favors. We must consider
individuals, typical people who are using rival brands.
A man on a Pullman, for instance, using his favorite
soap. What could you say to him in person to get him
to change to yours? We cannot go after thousands of
men until we learn how to win one.
   The maker may say that he has no distinctions. He is
making a good product, but much like others. He
deserves a good share of the trade, but he has nothing
exclusive to offer. However, there is nearly always
something impressive which others have not told. We
must discover it. We must have a seeming advantage.
People don't quit habits without reason.
   There is the problem of substitution and how to
head it off. That often steals much of one’s trade. This
must be considered in one’s original plan. One must
have the foresight to see all eventualities, and the
wisdom to establish his defenses in advance.
   Many pioneers in the line establish large demands.
Then through some fault in their foundations, lose a
large share of the harvest. Theirs is a mere brand, for


[[PAGE:72]]
instance, where it might have stood for an exclusive
product.
   Vaseline is an example. That product established a
new demand, then almost monopolized that demand
through wisdom at the start. To have called it some
brand of petroleum jelly might have made a difference
of millions in results.
   Jell-O, Postum, Victrola, Kodak, etc., established
coined names which came to typify a product. Some
such names have been admitted to the dictionary.
They have become common names, though coined and
exclusive.
   Royal Baking Powder and Toasted Corn Flakes, on
the other hand, when they pioneered their fields, left
the way open to perpetual substitution. So did
Horlick’s Malted Milk.
   The attitude of dealers must be considered. There is
a growing inclination to limit lines, to avoid duplicate
lines, to lesson inventories. If this applies to your line,
how will dealers receive it? If there is opposition, how
can we circumvent it?
   The problems of distribution are important and
enormous. To advertise something that few dealers
supply is a waste of ammunition. Those problems will
be considered in a separate chapter.

[[PAGE:73]]
  These are samples of the problems which
advertising men must solve. These are some of the
reasons why vast experience is necessary. One
oversight may cost the client millions in the end. One
wrong piece of strategy may prohibit success. Things
done in one way may be twice as easy, half as costly, as
when done another way.
  Advertising without this preparation is like a
waterfall going to waste. The power might be there,
but it is not made effective. We must center the force
and direct it in a practical direction.
  Advertising often looks very simple. Thousands of
men claim ability to do it. And there is still a wide
impression that many men can. As a result, much
advertising goes by favor. But the men who know
realize that the problems are as many and as
important as the problems in building a skyscraper.
And many of them lie in the foundations.




[[PAGE:74]]
                   Chapter 13
                Use Of Samples
    The product itself should be its own best salesman.
Not the product alone, but the product plus a mental
impression, and atmosphere, which you place around
it. That being so, samples are of prime importance.
However expensive, they usually form the cheapest
selling method. A salesman might as well go out
without his sample case as an advertiser.
    Sampling does not apply to little things alone, like
foods or proprietaries. It can be applied in some way
to almost anything. We have sampled clothing. We are
now sampling phonograph records.
    Samples serve numerous valuable purposes. They
enable one to use the word "Free" in ads. That often
multiplies the readers. Most people want to learn
about any offered gift. Tests often show that samples
pay for themselves – perhaps several times over – in

[[PAGE:75]]
multiplying the readers of your ads without additional
cost of space.
   A sample gets action. The reader of your ad may not
be convinced to the point of buying. But he is ready to
learn more about the product that you offer. So he cuts
out a coupon, lays it aside, and later mails it or
presents it. Without that coupon he would soon forget.
Then you have the name and address of an interested
prospect. You can start him using your product. You
can give him fuller information. You can follow him up.
   That reader might not again read one of your ads in
six months. Your impression would be lost. But when
he writes you, you have a chance to complete with that
prospect all that can be done. In that saving of waste
the sample pays for itself.
   Sometimes a small sample is not a fair test. Then we
may send an order on the dealer for a full-size
package. Or we may make the coupon good for a
package at the store. Thus we get a longer test.
   You say that is expensive. So is it expensive to gain a
prospect’s interest. It may cost you 50 cents to get the
person to the point of writing for a sample. Don't stop
at 15 cents additional to make that interest valuable.
   Another way in which samples pay is by keying
your advertisements. They register the interest you

[[PAGE:76]]
create. Thus you can compare one with another ad,
headline, plan and method.
   That means in any line an enormous saving. The
wisest, most experienced man cannot tell what will
most appeal in any line of copy. Without a key to guide
you, your returns are very apt to cost you twice what
they need cost. And we know that some ads on the
same product will cost ten times what others cost. A
sample may pay for itself several times over by giving
you an accurate check.
   Again samples enable you to refer customers where
they can be supplied. This is important before you
attain general distribution.
   Many advertisers lose much by being penny-wise.
They are afraid of imposition, or they try to save
pennies. That is why they ask ten cents for a sample,
or a stamp or two. Getting that dime may cost them
from 40 cents to $1. That is, it may add that to the cost
of replies. But it is remarkable how many will pay that
addition rather than offer a sample free.
   Putting a price on a sample greatly retards replies.
Then it prohibits you from using the word “Free” in
your ads. And that word "Free," as we have stated, will
generally more than pay for your samples.
   For the same reason some advertisers say, "You buy
one package, we will buy the other." Or they make a
[[PAGE:77]]
coupon good for part of the purchase price. Any keyed
returns will clearly prove that such offers do not pay.
Before a prospect is converted, it is approximately as
hard to get half price for your article as to get the full
price for it.
   Bear in mind that you are the seller. You are the one
courting interest. Then don't make it difficult to
exhibit that interest. Don't ask your prospects to pay
for your selling efforts. Three in four will refuse to pay
- perhaps nine in ten.
   Cost of requests for samples differ in every line. It
depends on your breadth of appeal. Some things
appeal to everybody, some to a small percentage. One
issue of the papers in Greater New York brought
1,460,000 requests for a can of evaporated milk. On a
chocolated drink, one-fifth the coupons published are
presented. Another line not widely used may bring a
fraction of that number.
   But the cost of inquiries is usually enough to be
important. Then don't neglect them. Don't stint your
efforts with those you have half sold. An inquiry
means that a prospect has read your story and is
interested. He or she would like to try your product
and learn more about it. Do what you would do if that
prospect stood before you.


[[PAGE:78]]
   Cost of inquiries depends largely on how they come.
Asking people to mail the coupon brings minimum
returns. Often four times as many will present that
coupon for a sample at the store. On a line before the
writer now, sample inquiries obtained by mail average
70 cents each. The same ads bring inquiries at from 18
cents to 22 cents each when the coupons are
presented at a local store.
   Most people write few letters. Writing is an effort.
Perhaps they have no stamps in the house. Most
people will pay carfare to get a sample rather than two
cents postage. Therefore, it is always best, where
possible, to have samples delivered locally.
   On one line three methods were offered. The
woman could write for a sample, or telephone, or call
at a store. Seventy percent of the inquiries came by
telephone. The use of the telephone is more common
and convenient than the use of stamps.
   Sometimes it is not possible to supply all dealers
with samples. Then we refer people to some central
stores. These stores are glad to have many people
come there. And other dealers do not generally object
so long as they share in the sales.
   It is important to have these dealers send you the
coupons promptly. Then you can follow up the
inquiries while their interest is fresh.
[[PAGE:79]]
    It is said that sample users repeat. They do to some
extent. But repeaters form a small percentage. Figure
it in your cost.
    Say to the woman, "Only one sample to a home" and
few women will try to get more of them. And the few
who cheat you are not generally people who would
buy. So you are not losing purchasers, but the samples
only.
    On numerous lines we have for long offered full-
sized packages free. The packages were priced at from
10 cents to 50 cents each. In certain territories for a
time we have checked up on repeaters. And we found
the loss much less than the cost of checking.
    In some lines samples would be wasted on children,
and they are most apt to get them. Then say in your
coupon "adults only." Children will not present such
coupons, and they will rarely mail them.
    But one must be careful about publishing coupons
good for a full-size package at any store. Some people,
and even dealers, may buy up many papers. We do not
announce the date of such offers. And we insert them
in Sunday papers, not so easily bought up.
    But we do not advocate samples given out
promiscuously. Samples distributed to homes, like
waifs on the doorsteps, probably never pay. Many of
them never reach the house or the housewife. When
[[PAGE:80]]
they do, there is no prediction for them. The product is
cheapened. It is not introduced in a favorable way.
   So with demonstrations in stores. There is always a
way to get the same results at a fraction of the cost.
   Many advertisers do not understand this. They
supply thousands of samples to dealers to be handed
out as they will. Could a trace be placed on the cost of
returns, the advertiser would be stunned.
   Give samples to interested people only. Give them
only to people who exhibit that interest by some effort.
Give them only to people to whom you have told your
story. First create an atmosphere of respect, a desire,
an expectation. When people are in that mood, your
sample will usually confirm the qualities you claim.
   Here again comes the advantage of figuring cost per
customer. That is the only way to gauge advertising.
Samples sometimes seem to double advertising cost.
They often cost more than the advertising. Yet, rightly
used, they almost invariably form the cheapest way to
get customers. And that is what you want.
   The arguments against samples are usually biased.
They may come from advertising agents who like to
see all the advertising money spent in print. Answer
such arguments by tests. Try some towns with them,
some without them. Where samples are effectively

[[PAGE:81]]
employed, we rarely find a line where they do not
lessen the cost per customer.




[[PAGE:82]]
                    Chapter 14
                Getting Distribution
   Most advertisers are confronted with the problem
of getting distribution. National advertising is
unthinkable without that. A venture cannot be
profitable if nine in ten of the converts fail to find the
goods.
   To force dealers to stock by bringing repeated
demands may be enormously expensive. To cover the
country with a selling force is usually impossible. To
get dealers to stock an unknown line on promise of
advertising is not easy. They have seen too many
efforts fail, too many promises rescinded.
   We cannot discuss all plans for getting distribution.
There are scores of ways employed, according to the
enterprise. Some start by soliciting direct sales – mail
orders – until the volume of demand forces dealers to
supply.

[[PAGE:83]]
   Some get into touch with prospects by a sample or
other offer, then refer them to certain dealers who are
stocked.
   Some well-known makers can get a large
percentage of dealers to stock in advance under
guarantee of sale. Some consign goods to jobbers so
dealers can easily order. Some name certain dealers in
their ads until dealers in general stock.
   The problems in this line are numberless. The
successful methods are many. But most of them apply
to lines too few to be worthy of discussion in a book
like this.
   We shall deal here with articles of wide appeal and
repeated sales, like foods or proprietary articles.
   We usually start with local advertising, even though
magazine advertising is best adapted to the article. We
get our distribution town by town, then change to
national advertising.
   Sometimes we name the dealers who are stocked.
As others stock, we add their names. When a local
campaign is proposed, naming certain dealers, the
average dealer wants to be included. It is often
possible to get most of them by offering to name them
in the first few ads.


[[PAGE:84]]
   Whether you advertise few or many dealers, the
others will stock in very short order if the advertising
is successful. Then the trade is referred to all dealers.
   The sample plans dealt with in the previous chapter
aid quick distribution. They often pay for themselves
in this way alone.
   If the samples are distributed locally, the coupon
names the stores. The prospects who go there to get
the samples know that those stores are supplied, if a
nearer dealer is not. Thus little trade is lost.
   When sample inquiries come to the advertiser,
inquiries are referred to certain dealers at the start.
Enough demand is centered there to force those
dealers to supply it.
   Sometimes most stores are supplied with samples,
but on the requirement of a certain purchase. You
supply a dozen samples with a dozen packages, for
instance. Then inquiries for samples are referred to all
stores. This quickly forces general distribution.
Dealers don't like to have their customers go to
competitors even for a sample.
   Where a coupon is used, good at any store for a full-
size package, the problem of distribution becomes
simple. Mail to dealers proofs of the ad which will
contain the coupon. Point out to each that many of his
customers are bound to present that coupon. Each
[[PAGE:85]]
coupon means a cash sale at full profit. No average
dealer will let those coupon customers go elsewhere.
   Such a free-package offer often pays for itself in this
way. It forms the cheapest way of getting general
distribution.
   Some of the most successful advertisers have done
this in a national way. They have inserted coupon ads
in magazines, each coupon good at any store for a full-
size package. A proof of the ad is sent to dealers in
advance, with a list of the magazines to be used, and
their circulation.
   In this way, in one week sometimes, makers attain a
reasonable national distribution. And the coupon ad,
when it appears, completes it. Here again the free
packages cost less than other ways of forcing
distribution. And they start thousands of users
besides. Palmolive Soap and Puffed Grains are among
the products which attained their distribution in that
way.

   Half the circulation of a newspaper may go to
outside towns. That half may be wasted if you offer a
sample at local stores. Say in your coupon that outside
people should write you for a sample. When they
write, do not mail the sample. Send the samples to a
local store, and refer inquirers to that store. Mailing a
[[PAGE:86]]
sample may make a convert who cannot be supplied.
But the store which supplies the sample will usually
supply demand.
   In these ways, many advertisers get national
distribution without employing a single salesman.
They get it immediately. And they get it at far lower
cost than by any other method.
   There are advertisers who, in starting, send every
dealer a few packages as a gift. That is better, perhaps,
than losing customers created. But it is very expensive.
Those free packages must be sold by advertising.
Figure their cost at your selling price, and you will see
that you are paying a high cost per dealer. A salesman
might sell these small stocks at a lower cost. And other
methods might be vastly cheaper.
   Sending stocks on consignment to retailers is not
widely favored. Many dealers resent it. Collections are
difficult. And unbusinesslike methods do not win
dealer respect.
   The plans advocated here are the best plans yet
discovered for the lines to which they apply. Other
lines require different methods. The ramifications are
too many to discuss in a book like this.
   But don't start advertising without distribution.
Don't get distribution by methods too expensive. Or by
slow, old-fashioned methods. The loss of time may
[[PAGE:87]]
cost you enormously in sales. And it may enable
energetic rivals to get ahead of you.
  Go to men who know by countless experiences the
best plan to apply to your line.




[[PAGE:88]]
                    Chapter 15
                Test Campaigns
   Almost any questions can be answered, cheaply,
quickly and finally, by a test campaign. And that's the
way to answer them – not by arguments around a
table. Go to the court of last resort – the buyers of your
product.
   On every new project there comes up the question
of selling that article profitably. You and your friends
may like it, but the majority may not. Some rival
product may be better liked or cheaper. It may be
strongly entrenched. The users won away from it may
cost too much to get.
   People may buy and not repeat. The article may last
too long. It may appeal to a small percentage, so most
of your advertising goes to waste.
   There are many surprises in advertising. A project
you will laugh at may make a great success. A project
you are sure of may fall down. All because tastes differ
[[PAGE:89]]
so. None of us know enough people’s desires to get an
average viewpoint.
   In the old days, advertisers ventured on their own
opinions. The few guessed right, the many wrong.
Those were the times of advertising disasters. Even
those who succeeded came close to the verge before
the tide was turned. They did not know their cost per
customer or their sale per customer. The cost of selling
might take long to come back. Often it never came
back.
   Now we let the thousands decide what the millions
will do. We make a small venture, and watch cost and
result. When we learn what a thousand customers
cost, we know almost exactly what a million will cost.
When we learn what they buy, we know what a million
will buy.
   We establish averages on a small scale, and those
averages always hold. We know our cost, we know our
sale, we know our profit or our loss. We know how
soon our cost comes back. Before we spread out, we
prove our undertaking absolutely safe. So there are
today no advertising disasters piloted by men who
know.
   Perhaps we try out our project in four or five towns.
We may use a sample offer or a free package to get
users started quickly. We learn in this way the cost per
[[PAGE:90]]
customer started. Then we wait and see if users buy
those samples. If they do, will they continue? How
much will they buy? How long does it take for the
profit to return our cost of selling?
   A test like this may cost $3,000 to $5,000. It is not
all lost, even when the product proves unpopular.
Some sales are made. Nearly every test will in time
bring back the entire cost.
   Sometimes we find that the cost of the advertising
comes back before the bills are due. That means that
the product can be advertised without investment.
Many a great advertiser has been built up without any
cost whatever beyond immediate receipts. That is an
ideal situation.
   On another product it may take three months to
bring back the cost with a profit. But one is sure of his
profit in that time. When he spreads out he must
finance accordingly.
   Think what this means. A man has what he
considers an advertising possibility. But national
advertising looks so big and expensive that he dare not
undertake it.
   Now he presents it in a few average towns, at a very
moderate cost. With almost no risk whatever. From
the few thousand he learns what the millions will do.

[[PAGE:91]]
Then he acts accordingly. If he then branches out he
knows to a certainty just what his results will be.
   He is playing on the safe side of a hundred to one
shot. If the article is successful, it may make him
millions. If he is mistaken about it, the loss is a trifle.
   These are facts we desire to emphasize and spread.
All our largest accounts are now built in this way, from
very small beginnings. When business men realize that
this can be done, hundreds of others will do it. For
countless fortune-earners now lie dormant.
   The largest advertiser in the world makes a
business of starting such projects. One by one he finds
out winners. Now he has twenty-six, and together they
earn many millions yearly.
   These test campaigns have other purposes. They
answer countless questions which arise in business.
   A large food advertiser felt that his product would
be more popular in another form. He and all his
advisers were certain about it. They were willing to act
on this supposition without consulting the consumers,
but wiser advice prevailed.
   He inserted an ad in a few towns with a coupon,
good at any store for a package of the new-style
product. Then he wrote to the users about it. They
were almost unanimous in their disapproval.

[[PAGE:92]]
   Later the same product was suggested in still
another form. The previous verdict made the change
look dubious. The advertiser hardly thought a test to
be worth while. But he submitted the question to a few
thousand women in a similar way and 91 percent
voted for it. Now he has a unique product which
promises to largely increase his sales.
   These tests cost about $1,000 each. The first one
saved him a very costly mistake. The second will
probably bring him large profits.
   Then we use test campaigns to try out new methods
on advertising already successful. Thus we constantly
seek for better methods, without interrupting plans
already proved out.
   In five years for one food advertiser we tried out
over fifty separate plans. Every little while we found
an improvement, so the results of our advertising
constantly grew. At the end of five years we found the
best plan of all. It reduced our cost of selling by 75
percent. That is, it was four times more effective than
the best plan used before.
   That is what mail order advertisers do – try out plan
after plan to constantly reduce the cost. Why should
any general advertiser be less business-like and
careful?
   Another service of the test campaign is this:
[[PAGE:93]]
    An advertiser is doing mediocre advertising. A
skilled advertising agent feels that he can greatly
increase results. The advertiser is doubtful. He is doing
fairly well. He has alliances which he hesitates to
break. So he is inclined to let well enough alone.
    Now the question can be submitted to the verdict of
a test. The new agent may take a few towns, without
interfering with the general campaign. Then compare
his results with the general results and prove his
greater skill.
    Plausible arguments are easy in this line. One man
after another comes to an advertiser to claim superior
knowledge or ability. It is hard to decide, and decisions
may be wrong.
    Now actual figures gained at a small cost can settle
the question definitely. The advertiser makes no
commitment. It is like saying to a salesman, "Go out for
a week and prove yourself." A large percentage of all
the advertising done would change hands if this
method were applied.
    Again we come back to scientific advertising.
Suppose a chemist would say in an arbitrary way that
this compound was best, or that better. You would
little respect his opinion. He makes tests – sometimes
hundreds of tests – to actually know which is best. He
will never state a supposition before he has proved it.
[[PAGE:94]]
How long before advertisers in general will apply that
exactness to advertising?




[[PAGE:95]]
                    Chapter 16
                Leaning On Dealers
   We cannot depend much in most lines on the active
help of jobbers or of dealers. They are busy. They have
many lines to consider. The profit on advertised lines
is not generally large. And an advertised article is apt
to be sold at cut prices.
   The average dealer does what you would do. He
exerts himself on brands of his own, if at all. Not on
another man’s brand.
   The dealer will often try to make you think
otherwise. He will ask some aid or concession on the
ground of extra effort. Advertisers often give extra
discounts. Or they make loading offers – perhaps one
case free in ten – in the belief that loaded dealers will
make extra efforts.
   This may be so on rare lines, but not generally. And
efforts if made do not usually increase the total sales.
They merely swing trade from one store to another.
[[PAGE:96]]
   On most lines, making a sale without making a
convert does not count for much. Sales made by
conviction – by advertising – are likely to bring
permanent customers. People who buy through casual
recommendations do not often stick. Next time
someone else gives other advice.
   Revenue which belongs to the advertiser is often
given away without adequate return. These discounts
and gifts could be far better spent in securing new
customers.
   Free goods must be sold, and by your own efforts
usually. One extra case with ten means that
advertising must sell ten percent more to bring you
the same return. The dealer would probably buy just
as much if you let him buy as convenient.
   Much money is often frittered away on other forms
of dealer help. Perhaps on window or store displays. A
window display, acting as a reminder, may bring to
one dealer a lion’s share of the trade. Yet it may not
increase your total sales at all.
   Those are facts to find out. Try one town in one way,
one in another. Compare total sales in those towns. In
many lines such tests will show that costly displays
are worthless. A growing number of experienced
advertisers spend no money on displays. This is all in
line of general publicity, so popular long ago. Casting
[[PAGE:97]]
bread upon the waters and hoping for its return. Most
advertising was of that sort twenty years ago.
   Now we put things to the test. We compare cost and
result on every form of expenditure. It is easily done.
Very many costly wastes are eliminated by this
modern process.
   Scientific advertising has altered many old plans
and conceptions. It has proved many long established
methods to be folly. And why should we not apply to
these things the same criterion we apply to other
forms of selling? Or to manufacturing costs?
   Your object in all advertising is to buy new
customers at a price which pays a profit. You have no
interest in centering trade at any particular store.
Learn what your consumers cost and what they buy. If
they cost you one dollar each, figure that every wasted
dollar costs you a possible customer.
   Your business will be built in that way, not by dealer
help. You must do your own selling, make your own
success. Be content if dealers fill the orders that you
bring. Eliminate your wastes. Spend all your
ammunition where it counts for most.




[[PAGE:98]]
                  Chapter 17
                 Individuality
   A person who desires to make an impression must
stand out in some way from the masses. And in a
pleasing way. Being eccentric, being abnormal is not a
distinction to covet. But doing admirable things in a
different way gives one a great advantage.
   So with salesmen, in person or in print. There is
uniqueness which belittles and arouses resentment.
There is refreshing uniqueness which enhances, which
we welcome and remember. Fortunate is the salesman
who has it.
   We try to give each advertiser a becoming style. We
make him distinctive, perhaps not in appearance, but
in manner and in tone. He is given an individuality
best suited to the people he addresses.
   One man appears rugged and honest in a line where
rugged honesty counts. One may be a good fellow

[[PAGE:99]]
where choice is a matter of favor. In other lines the
man stands out by impressing himself as an authority.
   We have already cited a case where a woman made
a great success in selling clothing to girls, solely
through a created personality which won.
   That's why we have signed ads sometimes – to give
them a personal authority. A man is talking – a man
who takes pride in his accomplishments – not a
"soulless corporation." Whenever possible we
introduce a personality into our ads. By making a man
famous we make his product famous. When we claim
an improvement, naming the man who made it adds
effect.
   Then we take care not to change an individuality
which has proved appealing. Before a man writes a
new ad on that line, he gets into the spirit adopted by
the advertiser. He plays a part as an actor plays it.
   In successful advertising great pains are taken to
never change our tone. That which won so many is
probably the best way to win others. Then people
come to know us. We build on that acquaintance
rather than introduce a stranger in strange guise.
People do not know us by name alone, but by looks
and mannerisms. Appearing different every time we
meet never builds up confidence.


[[PAGE:100]]
   Then we don't want people to think that
salesmanship is made to order. That our appeals are
created, studied, artificial. They must seem to come
from the heart, and the same heart always, save where
a wrong tack forces a complete change.
   There are winning personalities in ads as well as
people. To some we are glad to listen, others bore us.
Some are refreshing, some commonplace. Some
inspire confidence, some caution.
   To create the right individuality is a supreme
accomplishment. Then an advertiser’s growing
reputation on that line brings him ever-increasing
prestige. Never weary of that part. Remember that a
change in our characteristics would compel our best
friends to get acquainted all over.




[[PAGE:101]]
                    Chapter 18
                Negative Advertising
   To attack a rival is never good advertising. Don't
point out others' faults. It is not permitted in the best
mediums. It is never good policy. The selfish purpose
is apparent. It looks unfair, not sporty. If you abhor
knockers, always appear a good fellow.
   Show the bright side, the happy and attractive side,
not the dark and uninviting side of things. Show
beauty, not homeliness; health, not sickness. Don't
show the wrinkles you propose to remove, but the face
as it will appear. Your customers know all about
wrinkles.
   In advertising a dentifrice, show pretty teeth, not
bad teeth. Talk of coming good conditions, not
conditions which exist. In advertising clothes, picture
well-dressed people, not the shabby. Picture
successful men, not failures, when you advertise a

[[PAGE:102]]
business course. Picture what others wish to be, not
what they may be now.
   We are attracted by sunshine, beauty, happiness,
health, success. Then point the way to them, not the
way out of the opposite.
   Picture envied people, not the envious.
   Tell people what to do, not what to avoid.
   Make your every ad breathe good cheer. We always
dodge a Lugubrious Blue.
   Assume that people will do what you ask. Say, "Send
now for this sample." Don't say, "Why do you neglect
this offer?" That suggests that people are neglecting.
Invite them to follow the crowd.
   Compare the results of two ads, one negative, one
positive. One presenting the dark side, one the bright
side. One warning, the other inviting. You will be
surprised. You will find that the positive ad outpulls
the other four to one, if you have our experience.
   The "Before and after taking" ads are follies of the
past. They never had a place save with the afflicted.
Never let their memory lead you to picture the gloomy
side of things.




[[PAGE:103]]
                    Chapter 19
                 Letter Writing
   This is another phase of advertising which all of us
have to consider. It enters, or should enter, into nearly
all campaigns. Every business man receives a large
number of circular letters. Most of them go direct to
the waste basket. But he acts on others, and others are
filed for reference.
   Analyze those letters. The ones you act on or the
ones you keep have a headline which attracted your
interest. At a glance they offer something that you
want, something you may wish to know.
   Remember that point in all advertising
   A certain buyer spends $50,000,000 per year. Every
letter, every circular which comes to his desk gets its
deserved attention. He wants information on the lines
he buys.
   But we have often watched him. In one minute a
score of letters may drop into the waste basket. Then
[[PAGE:104]]
one is laid aside. That is something to consider at once.
Another is filed under the heading "Varnish." And later
when he buys varnish that letter will turn up.
   That buyer won several prizes by articles on good
buying. His articles were based on information. Yet the
great masses of matter which came to him never got
more than a glance.
   The same principles apply to all advertising. Letter
writers overlook them just as advertisers do. They fail
to get the right attention. They fail to tell what buyers
wish to know.
   One magazine sends out millions of letters annually.
Some to get subscriptions, some to sell books. Before
the publisher sends out five million letters he puts a
few thousands to test. He may try twenty-five letters,
each with a thousand prospects. He learns what
results will cost. Perhaps the plan is abandoned
because it appears unprofitable. If not, the letter which
pays best is the letter that he uses.
   Just as men are doing now in all scientific
advertising.
   Mail order advertisers do likewise. They test their
letters as they test their ads. A general letter is never
used until it proves itself best among many actual
returns.

[[PAGE:105]]
   Letter writing has much to do with advertising.
Letters to inquirers, follow-up letters. Wherever
possible they should be tested. Where that is not
possible, they should be based on knowledge gained
by tests.
   We find the same difference in letters as in ads.
Some get action, some do not. Some complete a sale,
some forfeit the impression gained. These letters,
going usually to half-made converts, that are
tremendously important.
   Experience generally shows that a two-cent letter
gets no more attention than a one-cent letter. Fine
stationery no more than poor stationery. The whole
appeal lies in the matter.
   It has been found that fine stationery and pamphlets
lessen the effect. They indicate an effort to sell on
other lines than merit. That has the same effect in
letters as in ads.
   A letter which goes to an inquirer is like a salesman
going to an interested prospect. You know what
created that interest. Then follow it up along that line,
not on some different argument. Complete the
impression already created. Don't undertake another
on a guess.
   In a letter as in ads, the great point is to get
immediate action. People are naturally dilatory. They
[[PAGE:106]]
postpone, and a postponed action is too often
forgotten.
   Do something if possible to get immediate action.
Offer some inducement for it. Or tell what delay may
cost. Note how many successful selling letters place a
limit on an offer. It expires on a certain date. That is all
done to get a prompt decision, to overcome the
tendency to delay.
   A mail order advertiser offered a catalog. The
inquirer might send for three or four similar catalogs.
He had that competition in making a sale.
   So he wrote a letter when he sent his catalog, and
enclosed a personal card. He said, "You are a new
customer, and we want to make you welcome. So
when you send your order please enclose this card.
The writer wants to see that you get a gift with the
order – something you can keep."
   With an old customer he gave some other reason for
the gift. The offer aroused curiosity. It gave preference
to his catalog. Without some compelling reason for
ordering elsewhere, the woman sent the order to him.
The gift paid for itself several times over by bringing
larger sales per catalog.
   The ways for getting action are many. Rarely can
one way be applied to two lines. But the principles are

[[PAGE:107]]
universal. Strike while the iron is hot. Get a decision
then. Have it followed by prompt action when you can.
   You can afford to pay for prompt action rather than
lose by delay. One advertiser induced hundreds of
thousands of women to buy six packages of his
product and send him the trademarks, to secure a
premium offer good only for one week.




[[PAGE:108]]
                   Chapter 20
                A Name That Helps
   There is great advantage in a name that tells a story.
The name is usually prominently displayed. To justify
the space it occupies, it should aid the advertising.
Some such names are almost complete advertisements
in themselves. May Breath is such a name. Cream of
Wheat is another. That name alone has been worth a
fortune. Other examples are Dutch Cleanser, Cuticura,
Dynashine, Minute Tapioca, 3-in-One Oil, Holeproof,
Alcorub, etc.
   Such names may be protected, yet the name itself
describes the product, so it makes a valuable display.
   Other coined names are meaningless. Some
examples are Kodak, Karo, Mazda, Sapolio, Vaseline,
Kotex, Lux, Postum, etc. They can be protected, and
long-continued advertising may give them a meaning.
When this is accomplished they become very

[[PAGE:109]]
valuable. But the great majority of them never attain
that status.
    Such names do not aid the advertising. It is very
doubtful that they justify display. The service of the
product, not the name, is the important thing in
advertising. A vast amount of space is wasted in
displaying names and pictures which tell no selling
story. The tendency of modern advertising is to
eliminate this waste.
    Other coined names signify ingredients which
anyone may use. Examples are Syrup of Figs, Coconut
Oil Shampoo, Tar Soap, Palmolive Soap, etc.
    Such products may dominate a market if the price is
reasonable, but they must to a degree meet
competition. They invite substitution. They are
naturally classified with other products which have
like ingredients, so the price must remain in that class.
    Toasted Corn Flakes and Malted Milk are examples
of unfortunate names. In each of those cases one
advertiser created a new demand. When the demand
was created, others shared it because they could use
the name. The originators depended only on a brand.
It is interesting to speculate on how much more
profitable a coined name might have been.
    On a patented product it must be remembered that
the right to a name expires with that patent. Names
[[PAGE:110]]
like Castoria, Aspirin, Shredded Wheat Biscuit, etc.,
have become common property.
   This is a very serious point to consider. It often
makes a patent an undesirable protection.
   Another serious fault in coined names is frivolity. In
seeking uniqueness one gets something trivial. And
that is a fatal handicap in a serious product. It almost
prohibits respect.
   When a product must be called by a common name,
the best auxiliary name is a man’s name. It is much
better than a coined name, for it shows that some man
is proud of his creation.
   Thus the question of a name is of serious
importance in laying the foundations of a new
undertaking. Some names have become the chief
factors in success. Some have lost for their originators
four-fifths of the trade they developed.




[[PAGE:111]]
                   Chapter 21
                Good Business
   A rapid stream ran by the writer’s boyhood home.
The stream turned a wooden wheel and the wheel ran
a mill. Under that primitive method, all but a fraction
of the stream’s potentiality went to waste.
   Then someone applied scientific methods to that
stream – put in a turbine and dynamos. Now, with no
more water, no more power, it runs a large
manufacturing plant.
   We think of that steam when we see wasted
advertising power. And we see it everywhere –
hundreds of examples. Enormous potentialities –
millions of circulation – used to turn a mill-wheel.
While others use that same power with manifold
effect.
   We see countless ads running year after year which
we know to be unprofitable. Men spending five dollars
to do what one dollar might do. Men getting back 30
[[PAGE:112]]
percent of their cost when they might get 150 percent.
And the facts could be easily proved.
    We see wasted space, frivolity, clever conceits,
entertainment. Costly pages filled with palaver which,
if employed by a salesman, would reflect on his sanity.
But those ads are always unkeyed. The money is spent
blindly, merely to satisfy some advertising whim.
    Not new advertisers only. Many an old advertiser
has little or no idea of his advertising results. The
business is growing through many efforts combined,
and advertising is given its share of the credit.
    An advertiser of many years’ standing, spending as
high as $700,000 per year, told the writer he did not
know whether his advertising was worth anything or
not. Sometimes he thought that his business would be
just as large without it.
    The writer replied, "I do know. Your advertising is
utterly unprofitable, and I could prove it to you in one
week. End an ad with an offer to pay five dollars to
anyone who writes you that he read the ad through.
The scarcity of replies will amaze you."
    Think what a confession – that millions of dollars
being spent without knowledge of results. Such a
policy applied to all factors in a business would bring
ruin in short order.

[[PAGE:113]]
   You see other ads which you may not like as well.
They may seem crowded or verbose. They are not
attractive to you, for you are seeking something to
admire, something to entertain. But you will note that
those ads are keyed. The advertiser knows that they
pay. The probability is that out of scores of traced ads
the type which you see has paid best.
   Many other ads which are not keyed now were
keyed at the beginning. They are based on known
statistics. They won on a small scale before they ever
ran on large scale. Those advertisers are utilizing their
enormous powers in full.
   Advertising is prima facie evidence that the man
who pays believes that advertising is good. It has
brought great results to others, it must be good for
him. So he takes it like some secret tonic which others
have endorsed. If the business thrives, the tonic gets
credit. Otherwise, the failure is due to fate.
   That seems almost unbelievable. Even a storekeeper
who inserts a twenty-dollar ad knows whether it pays
or not. Every line of a big store’s ad is charged to the
proper department. And every inch used must the next
day justify its cost.
   Yet most national advertising is done without
justification. It is merely presumed to pay. A little test
might show a way to multiply returns.
[[PAGE:114]]
   Such methods, still so prevalent, are not very far
from their end. The advertising men who practice
them see the writing on the wall. The time is fast
coming when men who spend money are going to
know what they get. Good business and efficiency will
be applied to advertising. Men and methods will be
measured by the known returns, and only competent
men can survive.
   Only one hour ago an old advertising man said to
the writer, "The day for our type is done. Bunk has lost
its power. Sophistry is being displaced by actuality.
And I tremble at the trend."
   So do hundreds tremble. Enormous advertising is
being done along scientific lines. Its success is common
knowledge. Advertisers along other lines will not
much longer be content.
   We who can meet the test welcome these changed
conditions. Advertisers will multiply when they see
that advertising can be safe and sure. Small
expenditures made on a guess will grow to big ones on
a certainty. Our line of business will be finer, cleaner,
when the gamble is removed. And we shall be prouder
of it when we are judged on merit.
                      --- The End ---



[[PAGE:115]]
                Products Currently Available (as of June 2021)
Copywriter Protégé Program Videos,           Copywriting Magic by Brian Keith
    Audios, Transcripts & Supplemental            Voiles
    Materials                                CopyMagic (book)
All 12 of My Dan Kenney Products             CopyMagic audio
● Dan Kennedy Direct Marketing               Eugene Schwartz - I Write With My
    SuperConference                               Ears
● Advanced Copywriting Seminar               Eugene Schwartz 206 Ads
● Advise And Profit                          Eugene Schwartz LIVE! - Gene
● Dan Kennedy on Infomercials (also               Schwartz at Rodale Press VIDEO
    applies to VSLs)                              & AUDIO
● Copywriting Clinic                         Eugene Schwartz on Breakthrough
● Customer Appreciation Seminar                   Copy
● Magnetic Marketing Deluxe                  Freedom Encyclopedia - Gene Schwartz
● Mega Success System For Speakers                mailing piece for Bill Kaysing's
● Platinum Inner Circle Master Mind          Fundamentals in Advertising by Albert
● The Official Millionaire Money                  Lasker
    Maker System                             Graphics and Desktop Publishing
● Ultimate Information Enterprenuer               Secrets for Non-Artists
● The UltimateInternet Entrepreneur          Graphics That Sell by Ted Kikoler
7 Steps To Killer Copy by Russ Phelps        How Shall We Know Good Copy by
11 Principles You Really Need To Know             John E. Kennedy eBook and Audio
    If You Expect To Make Money On           How To Be Your Own Best Marketing
    The Internet                                  Expert
41 Great Ads                                 How To Create Advertising That Sells
50 Things I've Learned in 50 Years by             by David Ogilvy
    John Caples                              How To Create Your Own Profit
72 Master Letters                                 Producing Headlines, Titles, and
100 Best Headlines and How They                   Bullets
    Could Make You Rich                      How To Make Maximum PROFITS In
127 Winning Headlines by Lawrence                 Minimum Time
    Bernstein                                How To Turn Your Swipe File Into A
2001 Greatest Headlines Ever Written              Gold Mine
Advertising Magic by Brian Keith             How To Wake Up the Marketing
    Voiles                                        Genius Inside You
A Message to Garcia Text&Audio               How To Write A Good Advertisement
Billion Dollar Ads 871p                           1942
Brett McFall Reports                         How To Write Letters That Win
Burn Disease Out of Your Body mailing        How To Write Website Copy That Sells
    piece by Eugene Schwartz                      by Scott Smith
Business Correspondence Library              Hurricane Andrew Seminar
    Newsletter 21 issues                     Intensive Advertising eBook

[[PAGE:116]]
Intensive Advertising Audio                 Scientific Advertising Illustrated Vol 2
Lord & Thomas Ads That Teach                Scientific Advertising - Audio
   Advertising                              Scientific Advertising - Troy S.
Lord & Thomas Creeds                           Laughren Video Movie
Marketing Made Easy Workshop                Secrets of the Greatest Advertising
   11h44m, 381p                                Geniuses
Million-Dollar Secrets of the Most          The Claude Hopkins Swipe File
   Expensive Copywriters in the World       The First Hundred Million Expanded
   - Interview with DanLok                     Edition
Money Making Sales Letters                  The Ginger Cure
My Life in Advertising Audio                The Greatest Advertising Secrets of All
My Life in Advertising eBook                   Time
Newstrack Advertising Classics              The Greatest Direct Mail Sales Letters
Obvious Adams                                  of All Time
Power Copywriting For the Internet          The Modern Store - John E. Powers
PsychologyOfAdvertising                     The Robert Collier Letter Book 1931
Reason Why Advertising AUDIO                The Top Secret Sales Letter Checklist
Reason Why Advertising eBook                   of Million Dollar Copywriters by
Robert Collier's Million Dollar Sales          Dan Lok
   Letters                                  Underground Email Copy That Sells
   Sun, and Ralph Napolitano                Underground Sales Letters




My Very Best to You,

Help@CarlGalletti.com
928-300-0168
(I will probably be busy when you call but your call is important to me so please
leave a voice mail message plus return phone & email)




[[PAGE:117]]

